Ignore PTC attestations for empty assigned slots (#5281)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/gloas/beacon-chain.md

    assert data.beacon_block_root == state.latest_block_header.parent_root
    # Check that the attestation is for the previous slot
    assert data.slot + 1 == state.slot
    # Check that the assigned slot was not empty
    if data.slot > 0:
        prev_block_root = get_block_root_at_slot(state, Slot(data.slot - 1))
        curr_block_root = get_block_root_at_slot(state, data.slot)

>         assert prev_block_root != curr_block_root

Reviewer: What's the purpose of this extra check?

Author: If there is a skipped slot at `data.slot`, `get_block_root_at_slot(data.slot)` will be equal to `get_block_root_at_slot(data.slot - 1)`. This check ensures that we reject any payload attestation that is casted for `data.slot` if it is a skipped slot.

Reviewer: I understand what the test does, I just don't see the purpose of including it and tying block validity to it.

Author: This check is not needed in terms of fork choice safety because such payload attestation will silently get dropped in `on_payload_attestation_message`

https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/3584b3a4fb93d64fd89a94839a7176c226b93c14/specs/gloas/fork-choice.md?plain=1#L996-L1000

I think instead, the change here is to enforce what we mention in the validator spec that proposer must include payload attestation in their block only if slot of the block referenced by `data.beacon_block_root` is exactly one slot before

https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/3584b3a4fb93d64fd89a94839a7176c226b93c14/specs/gloas/validator.md?plain=1#L224

The current `process_payload_attestation` is only partially enforcing this because it is only checking for `assert data.slot + 1 == state.slot`. If we have a missed slot at slot N, a slot N's PTC is casting a payload attestation with `data.beacon_block_root` to be the block at slot N-1, `data.slot` to be N, then it will pass this assertion. So we are adding the change here to fully enforce this rule from the validator spec.

Author: So the ultimate question is, if there is a missed slot, we expect the following block to have zero payload attestation. If the proposer somehow includes a payload attestation that was casted during that missed slot, and we know that payload attestation will be silently ignored by the fork choice handler, should we declare this block as valid or not?

Reviewer: why would we invalidate the block because of useless PTC attestations?

Author: Because validator spec says proposer must not do this but we don't fully enforce this during block validation? Can drop this change if we are okay with it.

Reviewer 2: No strong opinion from me.

    assert data.beacon_block_root == state.latest_block_header.parent_root
    # Check that the attestation is for the previous slot
    assert data.slot + 1 == state.slot
    # Check that the assigned slot was not empty.
    if data.slot > 0:

>         assert get_block_root_at_slot(state, data.slot - 1) != get_block_root_at_slot(state, data.slot)

Reviewer 2: Given the assert above, this can be simplified, right?
```suggestion
    # Check that the assigned slot was not empty
    assert get_block_root_at_slot(state, state.slot) != get_block_root_at_slot(state, data.slot)
```

Reviewer 2: Ah no. I'm wrong, these are not equivalent. Oops.
